---
title: CSS Subgrid is a game changer!
description: ""
date: 2026-05-06T22:21:00.000+10:00
tags:
  - post
---
If you inspect my site now your going to see a much flatter structure and thats thanks to CSS Subgrid.

I leaned on CSS Grid for my site’s layout when I first started building this site, creating a reusable grid with named columns for things like full-bleed sections, pop-out content, and constrained reading widths. The goal was to keep all layout decisions centralised while maintaining good readability and flexibility across the site. It made building pages fast and consistent, and was inspired by articles like [Layout Breakouts with CSS Grid - Ryan Mulligan](https://ryanmulligan.dev/blog/layout-breakouts/). 

Before using CSS Grid on my own site, I’d mostly used CSS Grid in smaller scenarios where Flexbox started to fight back. But while building a reusable site layout, I still found myself repeating structure. Sure, I made my layouts reusable, classes like `.wrapper` for my grid container and `.popout` or `.fullone` – best class name I've ever written btw – for aligning to specific columns in my grid. But that still meant on my homepage `.wrapper` was repeated four times. Not earth shattering I know but it just felt repetitive.

"Why cant I get access to grid everywhere, why just the direct children..." I recall grumbling. This was in 2022 and CSS Subgrid was only available in Firefox. With these grumblings my life continued on from there with no issues. My site functioned and no one rolled over in their grave because of my repeated use of `.wrapper`.

But recently, I had an itch to do more to my site, I had seen CSS Subgrid being mentioned in a few newsletters and seen it was baseline, so I decided to take a look to understand what problems CSS Subgrid solve.

From my learning about CSS Subgrid the thought I had was now I can define my CSS Grid as the top level parent of my markup and leverage CSS Subgrid elsewhere to align to the columns I want. The world is officially saved from my overuse of `.wrapper` divs.

## What changed now I use CSS Subgrid

Now, I have a single div which acts as my grid container, its right at the top of DOM. Ive removed the `.wrapper` divs for each section that used my old CSS grid and now I opt into CSS Subgrid instead. 

I started with a bunch of selectors where I need to opt in to CSS Subgrid, they were `.header, .footer, .main`. This allows me to have full width panels for those parts and then have content that is centred at my preferred reading length.

```
.header,
.footer,
.main {
    display: grid;
    grid-column: full;
    grid-template-columns: subgrid;

    :where(&)>* {
        grid-column: content;
    }
}
```

This covers 90% of my needs but I do have some sections of content where for design purposes the content should popout of the main reading width. This popout content appears on my blog page as the hero image and homepage for the intro.

For these I originally thought I could just drop a `grid-column: popout` in a utility class or on that sections class and call it a day. But I did have to do a little more then that. Not much and it might be just my understanding of CSS Grid and Subgrid for the moment but I'll talk about my solutions as of today.

For the homepage, the `<main class="main">` wraps the intro and recent article list both of which are their own `<sections class="section">`.
CSS Subgrid gets applied to the `.main` to make it full width - there is a background colour on it to help with my effect on scroll. The recent article section has a different background colour from the `.main` and my intro popping out from the general content width... cause of my super design reasons. 

The blog post page is pretty sane, except for my need to popout the hero image so its a bit wider then the general content. Why? Cause design stuff...

To achieve what I needed with CSS Subgrid I needed to apply CSS Grid and Subgrid again again... this is where I might be doing things wrong. The homepage was simple I added the `.section` to my previously defined list of selectors for opting into subgrid. This helped acheive the full bleed for the colour in the recent article section and allowed me to drop `grid-column: popout` on the intro block.

On the blog post page, same sort of solution, added `.article` to the ever ground list of selectors for subgrid. Then set the grid-column width on the hero image.

Did it make a huge difference
